data/contribute/contribute.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Contribute to _sharing knowledge_'
---

Thinking about contributing to the iO tech_hub? Great! We’re always looking for iO colleagues to share their knowledge with the world!

## What can I contribute?

The iO tech_hub is a place for a variety of content. Whether you want to add a blog, video, podcast or talk, the tech_hub is the place to be. We share content through a variety of channels. Did you know we have an [iO technology YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCNhy3hGzwMfbtX3Ei8Htcpg) as well?
Whether you have content in the above form or a new one, reach out to us and we’ll guide you.

## How can I contribute with a blog?

One of the most used forms of sharing knowledge on the iO tech_hub is writing blogs. You might already have an idea of what you want to write about. Generally, blogs on the iO tech_hub are not too long. It’s a collection of bite-size content that inspires people. Here are some tips and “rules” when contributing with a blog:

- All content is written in English
- You write the article from your point of view (e.g. “I find that…` instead of “We find that”)
- When making a summary of points, use lists for readability
- Try to make your article visual, images, screenshots and diagrams of what you are writing about are great to add

The steps for contributing with a blog are pretty minimal. The goal is to make it as easy as possible for you to contribute to the tech_hub. Excited? Here are the steps to contribute with a blog:

- Write your blog with the above points in mind
  - Make sure to check it with a tool like [Grammarly](https://www.grammarly.com/)
- Fork the [tech_hub repository](https://github.com/iodigital-com/io-technology)
  - Create a branch to add your blog
- Add yourself as an author in [data/authors](https://github.com/iodigital-com/io-technology/tree/develop/data/authors)
  - Provide the metadata you want to share
  - Add an image of yourself to [public/authors](https://github.com/iodigital-com/io-technology/tree/develop/public/authors)
- Add your blog in [data/blog](https://github.com/iodigital-com/io-technology/tree/develop/data/blog)
  - The filename will be the slug used (e.g. `[top-front-end-frameworks.md](http://top-front-end-framework.md)` will be mapped to `/articles/top-front-end-frameworks`
  - Copy the content of one of the other markdown files to ensure you follow the Frontmatter structure
  - Fill in the required metadata of your article
- Add your images to [public/articles](https://github.com/iodigital-com/io-technology/tree/develop/public/articles)
  - The folder name should match the slug you created earlier (e.g. `top-front-end-frameworks`
- [Run the tech_hub locally](https://github.com/iodigital-com/io-technology) to see if you are satisfied with how the article looks
- Open a pull request from your fork branch to the tech_hub `develop` branch
  - Notify Sander de Jong or Dave Bitter
  - Get a pull request review
  - Get your blog merged and published
- Share your blog on socials and relevant iO Slack channels

## Who can I reach out to regarding the tech_hub

If you have any questions, please don’t hesitate to reach out to Sander de Jong or Dave Bitter!

Commit message:

feat(contribute): add wiki and brand book content

data/contribute/contribute.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Contribute to _sharing knowledge_'
---

Thinking about contributing to the iO tech_hub? Great! We’re always looking for iO colleagues to share their knowledge with the world!

The iO tech blog offers space for relevant and interesting content, centred around our key technologies and expertise. Blogging not only enables you to make your knowledge accessible to others, but it also helps to reinforce your own knowledge. In addition, you can gain credibility as an expert and get recognised for your expertise. It is also important for iO: we want to attract future colleagues and spark their interest as an organisation that matches their vision, technology and working methods.

The iO tech blog has the following target audiences:

- Developers around the world who are interested in learning about the discussed concepts
- Students looking for internships and potential employees/job applicants looking for some more insight into what we do at iO
- Prospects who want to know if iO has knowledge about a particular subject

## What can I contribute?

The iO tech_hub is a place for a variety of content. Whether you want to add a blog, video, podcast or talk, the tech_hub is the place to be. We share content through a variety of channels. Did you know we have an [iO technology YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCNhy3hGzwMfbtX3Ei8Htcpg) as well?
Whether you have content in the above form or a new one, reach out to us and we’ll guide you.

## How can I contribute with a blog?

One of the most used forms of sharing knowledge on the iO tech_hub is writing blogs. You might already have an idea of what you want to write about. Generally, blogs on the iO tech_hub are not too long. It’s a collection of bite-size content that inspires people. Here are some tips and “rules” when contributing with a blog:

- We communicate in British English, following the relevant guidelines (e.g. behaviour vs. behavior, centre vs. center, organisation vs. organization, 23 July vs July 23rd)
- Given the fact that our brand name starts with a lowercase letter and most spelling guidelines require sentences to start with a capital letter, we avoid putting iO at the beginning of a sentence. We do not capitalise the i, nor do we start sentences with a lowercase letter.
- We talk about our people as "talents", "colleagues" and "experts", rather than "employees".
- The organisations we work for are not customers, they are clients. A customer buys products, a client buys services.
- You write the article from your point of view (e.g. “I find that…` instead of “We find that...”)
- When making a summary of points, use lists for readability
- Try to make your article visual, images, screenshots and diagrams of what you are writing about are great to add

The steps for contributing with a blog are pretty minimal. The goal is to make it as easy as possible for you to contribute to the tech_hub. Excited? Here are the steps to contribute with a blog:

- Write your blog with the above points in mind
  - Make sure to check it with a tool like:
    - [Grammarly](https://www.grammarly.com/)
    - [Grammarly for Visual Studio Code](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=znck.grammarly)
    - [LanguageTool for Visual Studio Code](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=adamvoss.vscode-languagetool)
- Fork the [tech_hub repository](https://github.com/iodigital-com/io-technology)
  - Create a branch to add your blog
- Add yourself as an author in [data/authors](https://github.com/iodigital-com/io-technology/tree/develop/data/authors)
  - Provide the metadata you want to share
  - Add an image of yourself to [public/authors](https://github.com/iodigital-com/io-technology/tree/develop/public/authors)
- Add your blog in [data/blog](https://github.com/iodigital-com/io-technology/tree/develop/data/blog)
  - The filename will be the slug used (e.g. `[top-front-end-frameworks.md](http://top-front-end-framework.md)` will be mapped to `/articles/top-front-end-frameworks`
  - Copy the content of one of the other markdown files to ensure you follow the Frontmatter structure
  - Fill in the required metadata of your article
- Add your images to [public/articles](https://github.com/iodigital-com/io-technology/tree/develop/public/articles)
  - The folder name should match the slug you created earlier (e.g. `top-front-end-frameworks`
- [Run the tech_hub locally](https://github.com/iodigital-com/io-technology) to see if you are satisfied with how the article looks
- Open a pull request from your fork branch to the tech_hub `develop` branch
  - Notify Sander de Jong or Dave Bitter
  - Get a pull request review
  - Get your blog merged and published
- Share your blog on socials and relevant iO Slack channels

## Who can I reach out to regarding the tech_hub

If you have any questions, please don’t hesitate to reach out to Sander de Jong or Dave Bitter!
